README.md, before:

# ØMQ Asterisk Manager Interface (AMI) Broker
ØMQ broker is used to distribute Asterisk AMI messages.
It is based on res_zmq_manager module from [here](https://github.com/litnimax/asterisk-zmq).

## How it works ##
![Images](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/litnimax/zmq-ami-broker/master/doc/asterisk-zeromq-state-dia.png)

The Broker connect to Asterisk res_manager_zmq module using ømq sockets. This asterisk module has 2 ømq sockets:
* addr_cmd - this socket is REQ/REP type and is used to accept AMI actions over ømq.
* addr_evt - this socket is SUB/PUB type and is used to pubish all AMI events to ømq endpoints, it does not accept actions.

So the Broker receives all AMI messages from all connected Asterisk servers and when events are 
DeviceStateChange or PresenceStateChange it passes these events to other servers using AMI action SetVar 
with DEVICE_STATE and PRESENCE_STATE functions.

So currently it supports only DeviceStateChange and PresenceStateChange but support for other messages can be easily implemented.

## Requirements ##
* Python 2.7.
* System libs libzmq and libzmq-dev.
* Python extension pyZMQ (python-zmq system packages or installed via pip).
* Asterisk headers to compile res_zmq_manager (asterisk-dev package or sources).
* Asterisk modules res_manager_devicestate.so and res_manager_presencestate.so.
* enabled=yes in etc/asterisk/manager.conf

## Installation
Installation is shown in this screencast.
Installation steps:
* Download, compile, install and configure res_zmq_manager.
* Download Broker and add your servers to config.ini file (See [example_config.ini](/litnimax/zmq-ami-broker/blob/master/example_config.ini))
* Run the Broker

### Installation of res_zmq_manager ###
Download it from [here](https://github.com/litnimax/asterisk-zmq).
```
git clone https://github.com/litnimax/asterisk-zmq.git
cd asterisk-zmq
make
```
If make fails check that your have asterisk includes. If you have downloaded asterisk source then add CFLAGS variable to point to include folder:
```
CFLAGS=-I/home/asterisk/include make
```
After make is down take res_zmq_manager.so from build folder and copy it to modules directory:
```
cp build/res_zmq_manager.so /usr/lib/asterisk/modules/
```
Now copy configuration file to /etc/asterisk/:
```
cp conf/zmq_manager.conf /etc/asterisk
```
Now restart Asterisk or load the module manually with 
```
module load res_zmq_manager.so
```

#### Configure Asterisk hints
All servers must share the same hints file. Here's an example:
```
exten => 100,hint,SIP/100&Custom:SIP/100
exten => 100,hint,SIP/200&Custom:SIP/200
```
In this scenario SIP user 100 is connected to Asterisk-1, and user 200 - to Asterisk-2.
When SIP/100 device state is changed then AMI event DeviceStateChange is generated and sent to ØMQ Broker application where it is distributed over all Asterisk servers it's connected to. This distribution is done in form of AMI action SetVar DEVICE_STATE which accepts Custom only devices. So Asterisk-2 server does not have SIP/100 connected and thus sets hint 100 to Custom:SIP/100 that it accepts from Asterisk-1 which in case is the state of SIP/100 @ Asterisk-1.


### Installing and running the Broker
The Broker depends on python zmq library. It can be installed system wide or in virtualenv. Here we cover virtualenv way.
```
git clone https://github.com/litnimax/zmq-ami-broker.git
cd zmq-ami-broker
virtualenv env
source env/bin/activate
pip install -r requirenents.txt
```
Now create a copy of config.ini and update it with your settings:
```
cp example_config.ini config.ini
```
Now run the Broker:
```
python broker.py config.ini
```

## Config file comments
Here is the example config for 2 Asterisk servers:
```
[general]
device_state = yes
presence = no
;debug, info, warning, error
log_level = info
request_timeout = 1000
count_messages  = no
verbose_messages = no

[servers]
sections = server-1, server-2

[server-1]
name = Console 1
addr = 192.168.56.101
cmd_port = 30967
evt_port = 30968
ami_trace = no

[server-2]
name = Console 2
addr = 192.168.56.102
cmd_port = 30967
evt_port = 30968
ami_trace = no
```
* device_state - distribute device state (catch DeviceStateChange action);
* presence - distribute presence state (catch PresenceStateChange action);
* log_level - logging level, currently only console logging is supported;
* request_timeout - timeout on socket read operation in msec;
* count_messages  - reserved for future use;
* verbose_messages - print catched AMI messages;
* addr - ip address of Asterisk server;
* cmd_port - ØMQ socket for AMI actions (from /etc/asterisk/zmq_manager.conf);
* evt_port - ØMQ socket for AMI events (from /etc/asterisk/zmq_manager.conf);
* ami_trace - if yes print all AMI messages received from server.

Commit message:

Updated to reflect client / server addon.

README.md, after:

# ØMQ Asterisk Manager Interface (AMI) Broker

This software is primarily used to distribute Asterisk events such DeviceStateChange between Asterisk servers.

There is two possible configurations:
* Broker - Broker connects to each Asterisk server ZMQ AMI events port. In this configuration the Borker must be able to connect to each of Asterisk servers.
* Client / Server - here every Asterisk server has ZMQ Agent running locally that connects to Asterisk ZMQ AMI events port and re-transmits AMI events to ZMQ Server which in turn publishes these events to all connected Agents which in turn send AMI Set(DEVICE_STATE) command to Asterisk ZMQ commands port.

It is based on res_zmq_manager module from [here](https://github.com/litnimax/asterisk-zmq).

## How it works ##

Broker scheme:

![Images](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/litnimax/zmq-ami-broker/master/doc/asterisk-zeromq-state-dia.png)

The Broker connect to Asterisk res_manager_zmq module using ømq sockets. This asterisk module has 2 ømq sockets:
* addr_cmd - this socket is REQ/REP type and is used to accept AMI actions over ømq.
* addr_evt - this socket is SUB/PUB type and is used to pubish all AMI events to ømq endpoints, it does not accept actions.

So the Broker receives all AMI messages from all connected Asterisk servers and when events are 
DeviceStateChange or PresenceStateChange it passes these events to other servers using AMI action SetVar 
with DEVICE_STATE and PRESENCE_STATE functions.

So currently it supports only DeviceStateChange and PresenceStateChange but support for other messages can be easily implemented.

## Requirements ##
* Python 2.7.
* System libs libzmq and libzmq-dev.
* Python extension pyZMQ (python-zmq system packages or installed via pip).
* Asterisk headers to compile res_zmq_manager (asterisk-dev package or sources).
* Asterisk modules res_manager_devicestate.so and res_manager_presencestate.so.
* enabled=yes in etc/asterisk/manager.conf

## Installation
Installation is shown in this screencast.
Installation steps:
* Download, compile, install and configure res_zmq_manager.
* Download Broker and add your servers to config.ini file (See [example_config.ini](/litnimax/zmq-ami-broker/blob/master/example_config.ini))
* Run the Broker

### Installation of res_zmq_manager ###
Download it from [here](https://github.com/litnimax/asterisk-zmq).
```
git clone https://github.com/litnimax/asterisk-zmq.git
cd asterisk-zmq
make
```
If make fails check that your have asterisk includes. If you have downloaded asterisk source then add CFLAGS variable to point to include folder:
```
CFLAGS=-I/home/asterisk/include make
```
After make is down take res_zmq_manager.so from build folder and copy it to modules directory:
```
cp build/res_zmq_manager.so /usr/lib/asterisk/modules/
```
Now copy configuration file to /etc/asterisk/:
```
cp conf/zmq_manager.conf /etc/asterisk
```
Now restart Asterisk or load the module manually with 
```
module load res_zmq_manager.so
```

#### Configure Asterisk hints
All servers must share the same hints file. Here's an example:
```
exten => 100,hint,SIP/100&Custom:SIP/100
exten => 100,hint,SIP/200&Custom:SIP/200
```
In this scenario SIP user 100 is connected to Asterisk-1, and user 200 - to Asterisk-2.
When SIP/100 device state is changed then AMI event DeviceStateChange is generated and sent to ØMQ Broker application where it is distributed over all Asterisk servers it's connected to. This distribution is done in form of AMI action SetVar DEVICE_STATE which accepts Custom only devices. So Asterisk-2 server does not have SIP/100 connected and thus sets hint 100 to Custom:SIP/100 that it accepts from Asterisk-1 which in case is the state of SIP/100 @ Asterisk-1.


### Installing and running
The software depends on python zmq library. It can be installed system wide or in virtualenv. Here we cover virtualenv way.
```
git clone https://github.com/litnimax/zmq-ami-broker.git
cd zmq-ami-broker
virtualenv env
source env/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
```
#### Broker configuration and running
Now create a copy of config.ini and update it with your settings:
```
cp example_config.ini config.ini
```
Now run the Broker:
```
python broker.py config.ini
```
##### Broker config file comments

Here is the example config for 2 Asterisk servers:
```
[general]
device_state = yes
presence = no
;debug, info, warning, error
log_level = info
request_timeout = 1000
count_messages  = no
verbose_messages = no

[servers]
sections = server-1, server-2

[server-1]
name = Console 1
addr = 192.168.56.101
cmd_port = 30967
evt_port = 30968
ami_trace = no

[server-2]
name = Console 2
addr = 192.168.56.102
cmd_port = 30967
evt_port = 30968
ami_trace = no
```
* device_state - distribute device state (catch DeviceStateChange action);
* presence - distribute presence state (catch PresenceStateChange action);
* log_level - logging level, currently only console logging is supported;
* request_timeout - timeout on socket read operation in msec;
* count_messages  - reserved for future use;
* verbose_messages - print catched AMI messages;
* addr - ip address of Asterisk server;
* cmd_port - ØMQ socket for AMI actions (from /etc/asterisk/zmq_manager.conf);
* evt_port - ØMQ socket for AMI events (from /etc/asterisk/zmq_manager.conf);
* ami_trace - if yes print all AMI messages received from server.

#### Client / Server configuration and running

* Edit server_config.py and update your settings.
* Edit agent_config.py and update your settings.

Now run server in one place:
```
python server.py
```
And run agents on every Asterisk server:
```
python agent.py
```
